DOCSP-46427: client bulk write (#111)
mongodb/docs-scala: source/write/bulk-write.txt

- :ref:`Collection <scala-coll-bulk-write>`: You can use the 
  ``MongoCollection.bulkWrite()`` method to perform bulk write operations on a 
  single collection. In this method, each kind of write operation requires at
  least one database call. For example, ``MongoCollection.bulkWrite()`` puts multiple update
  operations in one call, but makes two separate calls to the database for an insert
  operation and a replace operation.

- :ref:`Client <scala-client-bulk-write>`: If your application connects to
  {+mdb-server+} version 8.0 or later, you can use the ``MongoClient.bulkWrite()``
  method to perform bulk write operations on multiple collections and databases 
  in the same cluster. This method performs all write operations 
  in one database call.

.. _scala-coll-bulk-write:

Collection Bulk Write
---------------------

Bulk write operations contain one or more write operations. To perform a bulk 
write operation at the collection level, pass a ``Seq`` of ``WriteModel`` 
documents to the ``MongoCollection.bulkWrite()`` method. A ``WriteModel`` is a 
model that represents a write operation.

> For each write operation you want to perform, create an instance of one of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each write operation that you want to perform, create an instance of one of
```

the following arguments:

- **Query filter** that specifies the criteria used to match documents in your collection.

> - **Update operation** you want to perform. To learn more about update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Update operation** that you want to perform. To learn more about update
```

an order to matched documents before the driver performs the update
operation, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: scala

   val options = UpdateOptions.sort(ascending("name"))

To update *multiple* documents, create an instance of ``UpdateManyModel`` and pass
the same arguments as for ``UpdateOneModel``. The ``UpdateManyModel``
class specifies updates for *all* documents that match your query

> filter.

Author: Good catch!

   target collection. The driver reports all write concern errors after
   attempting all operations, regardless of execution order.

Customize Bulk Write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``MongoCollection.bulkWrite()`` method optionally accepts a

> ``BulkWriteOptions`` parameter, which specifies options you can use to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``BulkWriteOptions`` parameter, which specifies options that you can use to
```

   * - ``getUpserts()``
     - | The list of upserted documents, if any.

.. _scala-client-bulk-write:

Client Bulk Write
-----------------

When connecting to a deployment running {+mdb-server+} 8.0 or later,
you can use the ``MongoClient.bulkWrite()`` method to write
to multiple databases and collections in the same cluster. The
``MongoClient.bulkWrite()`` method performs all write operations in a
single call.

The ``MongoClient.bulkWrite()`` method takes a 
``List`` containing one or more ``ClientNamespacedWriteModel`` instances
to represent different write operations. You can construct instances of
the ``ClientNamespacedWriteModel`` interface by using instance methods.
For example, an instance of ``ClientNamespacedInsertOneModel`` represents an
operation to insert one document, and you can create this model by using
the ``ClientNamespacedWriteModel.insertOne()`` method.

> The models and their corresponding instance methods are described
> in the table below.

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
The following table describes the models and their corresponding instance methods:
```

document that has a ``name`` value of ``"Freya Polk"`` in the ``people``
collection. It also sets the value of the ``manufacturer`` field to
``"Premium Technologies"`` in all documents that have a ``category``
value of ``"electronic"`` in the ``things`` collection.

If multiple documents match the query filter specified in
a ``ClientNamespacedUpdateOneModel`` instance, the operation updates the
first result. You can specify a sort order in a `ClientUpdateOneOptions
<{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/bulk/ClientUpdateOneOptions.html>`__
instance to apply an order to matched documents before the driver
performs the update operation, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: scala

   val options = ClientUpdateOneOptions
     .clientUpdateOneOptions()
     .sort(ascending("_id"))

Replace Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example shows how to create models to replace
existing documents in the ``db.people`` and ``db.things`` collections:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/client-bulk-write.scala
   :start-after: start-replace-models
   :end-before: end-replace-models
   :language: scala
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> After this example runs successfully, the document that has an ``_id`` value of ``1`` 
> in the ``people`` collection is replaced with a new document. The document in 
> the ``things`` collection that has an ``_id`` value of ``1`` 
> is replaced with a new document.

Reviewer: s: for clarity, something like:

```suggestion
The previous code example replaces the following documents with new documents:

- The document in the ``people`` collection that has an ``_id`` value of ``1`` 
- The document in the ``things`` collection that has an ``_id`` value of ``1`` 
```

If multiple documents match the query filter specified in
a ``ClientNamespacedReplaceOneModel`` instance, the operation replaces the
first result. You can specify a sort order in a `ClientReplaceOneOptions
<{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/bulk/ClientReplaceOneOptions.html>`__
instance to apply an order to matched documents before the driver
performs the replace operation, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: scala

   val options = ClientReplaceOneOptions
     .clientReplaceOneOptions()
     .sort(ascending("_id"))

Perform the Bulk Operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After you define a ``ClientNamespacedWriteModel`` instance for each

> operation you want to perform, pass a list of these instances to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operation that you want to perform, pass a list of these instances to the
```

client ``bulkWrite()`` method. By default, the method runs the

> operations in the order they're specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operations in the order that you specify them.
```

The following example performs multiple write operations by using the
``bulkWrite()`` method:

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable: 

   .. input:: /includes/write/client-bulk-write.scala
      :start-after: start-perform
      :end-before: end-perform
      :language: scala
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      
      AcknowledgedSummaryClientBulkWriteResult{insertedCount=1, matchedCount=1, ...}

If any of the write operations fail, the driver raises a
``ClientBulkWriteException`` and does not perform any further individual operations.
``ClientBulkWriteException`` includes a ``BulkWriteError`` that can be accessed by using the
``ClientBulkWriteException.getWriteErrors()`` method, which provides details of the

> individual failure.

Reviewer: s: can there be multiple failures? if so, i think this should be 'individual failures.' if not, i would go with just 'the failure.'

.. _scala-client-bulk-write-options:

Customize Bulk Write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can pass an instance of ``ClientBulkWriteOptions`` to the
``bulkWrite()`` method to customize how the driver performs the bulk write
operation.

Order of Execution
``````````````````

By default, the driver runs the individual operations in a bulk

> operation in the order that you specify them until an error occurs, or
> until the operation completes successfully.

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
operation in the order that you specify them. The driver runs the operations until an error occurs, or
until all the bulk operation successfully completes.
```

However, you can pass ``false`` to the ``ordered()`` method when creating
a ``ClientBulkWriteOptions`` instance to direct the driver to perform

> write operations in an unordered way. When using the unordered option,
> an error-producing operation does not prevent the driver from running
> other write operations in the bulk write operation.

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
write operations in an unordered way. If you do, the driver tries to
run all write operations in the bulk write operation, even if one
operation produces an error.
```

The following code sets the ``ordered`` option to ``false`` in an
instance of ``ClientBulkWriteOptions`` and performs a bulk write operation to 

> insert multiple documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
insert multiple documents:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/client-bulk-write.scala
   :start-after: start-options
   :end-before: end-options
   :language: scala
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> Even though the write operation inserting a document with a duplicate key results
> in an error, the other operations are performed because the write operation is
> unordered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the write operation that inserts a document with a duplicate key results
in an error, the driver performs the other operations because the write operation is
unordered.
```
